Title: M-LINKX: Multiview Graph Learning for Brain Cognitive Disease Detection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.14847v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 00:17:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# M-LINKX: Multiview Graph Learning for Brain Cognitive Disease Detection 

An Phan, Yufei Jin, and Xingquan Zhu 

Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA 

{tphan2025, yjin2021, xzhu3 }@fau.edu 

Abstract —Electroencephalogram (EEG) is a non-invasive and relatively low-cost procedure that measures brain electricity for the detection of cognitive diseases. EEG-based classification of dementia-related conditions, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD), remains challenging because EEG signals are noisy, non-stationary, and vary across subjects. Segment-based learning provides a practical way to model long EEG recordings by converting them into fixed-length inputs. For each segment, dis-criminative information may be explored by using signals within each channel ( i.e. electrode), as well as interactions between EEG channels. In this paper, we propose M-LINKX , a multi-view graph learning framework for EEG-based dementia classification. For each segment, we extract channel-level node features and con-struct multiple functional-connectivity (FC) graph views, where each view is defined by a specific combination of connectivity metric, frequency band, and topology filter, respectively. Instead of relying on message passing over the constructed graphs, 

M-LINKX follows a simple design in modeling node features and adjacency-based connectivity representations. The graph-view representations are fused using global trainable view weights, and subject-level prediction is obtained by averaging segment-level probabilities. Experiments on two three-class EEG datasets with different diagnostic groups, CAUEEG (HC/MCI/Dementia) and AHEAP (HC/AD/FTD), show that M-LINKX achieves the best subject-level performance under the main experimental settings. Our study suggests that multi-view functional connectivity can improve EEG-based dementia classification when integrated with an appropriate graph-learning architecture. Code and data are available at https://github.com/anphantt/MLINKX. 

Index Terms —Dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, EEG, functional connectivity, multi-view graph learning, LINKX 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Dementia-related conditions, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD), create a growing global burden, with more than 55 million people currently living with dementia and projections reaching 139 million by 2050 [1]. While AD accounts for approximately 60–70% of dementia cases, MCI may represent an early symptomatic stage before dementia [2], and FTD often affects younger individuals with behav-ioral, language, and communication impairments [3]. These challenges motivate accessible and cost-effective tools for early detection and differential diagnosis. EEG is a promising modality because it is non-invasive, relatively low-cost, and more accessible than MRI, fMRI, or PET [4]. Existing EEG-based dementia classification studies differ largely in how they represent the EEG signal. End-to-end deep learning approaches learn discriminative patterns directly from raw EEG using CNNs, LSTM-based, and transformer-based architectures [5, 6, 7]. Other approaches first transform EEG signals into compact descriptors, such as relative band power, Hjorth parameters, wavelet energy, spectral entropy, and statistical features, and then use these representations with conventional machine learning, ensemble methods, or deep learning models [8, 9, 10]. These channel-wise representations can capture vital temporal or spectral abnormalities associated with dementia, but do not explicitly quantify how different EEG channels interact with each other. Since neurodegenera-tive changes may also affect communication among distributed brain regions, functional connectivity (FC) has been widely used as a complementary EEG representation in dementia studies. FC measures statistical dependency or synchronization between pairs of EEG channels, with common measures including coherence, phase-lag index (PLI), weighted phase-lag index (wPLI), and Pearson correlation [11, 12, 13]. Recent EEG connectivity studies have shown that dementia-related FC alterations are not uniform across frequency bands, connectivity metrics, or brain regions. A recent systematic review reported that EEG connectivity studies in MCI and AD commonly use coherence, phase-locked measures, and graph-theoretic features; in addition to the frequently observed reduction of alpha-band connectivity, some studies also re-ported increased theta-band connectivity [13]. Subject-level coherence from five frequency bands was represented as a connectivity tensor and used in a Coherence-CNN for AD, FTD, and cognitively normal classification [11]. FC changes measured using Pearson correlation, mutual information, and PLI showed reduced theta-band connectivity in frontal regions, increased beta-band connectivity in posterior regions, and AD-specific reductions in central theta-band connectivity [12]. Alpha-band FC was found to be most discriminative for separating dementia groups from healthy controls and delta-band FC contributed more to AD–FTD discrimination [14]. Together, these findings indicate that dementia-related EEG connectivity is heterogeneous and depends on how functional relationships are measured and represented. Because FC describes pairwise relationships between EEG channels, an FC matrix can be naturally formulated as a graph, where EEG channels are represented as nodes and FC values define edges through an adjacency matrix. In this formulation, channel-level EEG descriptors serve as node features, allowing the model to preserve local channel-specific information while the graph structure captures relational dependencies among arXiv:2608.14847v1 [cs.LG] 14 Aug 2026 electrode sites. Recent EEG-based dementia studies have adopted graph models to capture such connectivity patterns [15, 16, 17, 18]. However, graph-based models are sensitive to how the adjacency matrix is constructed, because message passing is directly guided by the chosen graph topology. A single connectivity graph may therefore provide only one approximation of the underlying neural interaction structure. In general graph learning, multi-view graph models address this limitation by constructing multiple graph views and learning complementary information across them. These views may correspond to different adjacency matrices, feature-topology channels, or relational assumptions, allowing the model to integrate diverse structural information rather than relying on one predefined graph [19, 20, 21, 22]. For EEG-based dementia classification, this multi-view idea can be translated into multiple FC graph representations of the same EEG segment. Instead of treating graph construction as a single fixed choice, different connectivity metrics, fre-quency bands, and topology filters can define complementary graph views that emphasize different channel-interaction pat-terns. Recent studies have begun to explore multi-view and frequency-specific graph representations for EEG-based de-mentia analysis. Multi-frequency graphs have been constructed using Pearson correlation and mutual information to capture both linear and nonlinear interactions [23]. Other work has combined functional and structural connectivity in a multi-graph convolutional framework with frequency-specific graph inputs [24]. In addition, joint modeling of spatial, temporal, and spectral dependencies has been explored using a dual-path graph neural network [25]. These studies suggest that dementia-related information may be distributed across differ-ent connectivity metrics, frequency bands, and graph struc-tures, motivating a multi-view connectivity learning strategy rather than relying on a single predefined FC representation. Motivated by this observation, we propose M-LINKX , a multi-view graph learning framework for EEG-based dementia classification. Inspired by LINKX [26], a graph learning architecture originally designed for non-homophilous graph settings, M-LINKX separately models node features and ad-jacency information. This design is suitable for FC-based EEG graphs because edges represent statistical or phase-based dependencies between electrode signals rather than simple homophilic similarity between neighboring nodes; consistent with this view, recent brain network modeling work has questioned whether conventional message passing is always necessary for FC graphs, since FC matrices already encode pairwise relationships and message-passing models may reuse or smooth this information in a suboptimal way [27]. This paper makes the following contributions.  

> •

We introduce M-LINKX , a multi-view graph learning frame-work for EEG-based dementia classification. In this frame-work, each EEG segment is represented using channel-level node features together with multiple FC graph views, where each view is defined by a specific combination of connectivity metric, frequency band, and graph topology.  

> •

We design a multi-view encoder that separately models node features and graph-view adjacency matrices representations. The graph-view representations are fused using global train-able view weights, allowing the model to assign different contributions to different connectivity views.  

> •

We evaluate M-LINKX on two dementia-related EEG datasets with different diagnostic groups and baselines. Results show that M-LINKX achieves the best subject-level performance under the main experimental settings. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II defines the notation and problem setting. Section III presents the proposed M-LINKX methodology. Section IV reports the experimental results and analysis. Section V concludes the paper and discusses future work. II. N OTATION AND PROBLEM DEFINITION 

Let C = {c1, . . . , c C } denote the set of EEG channels, where C = |C| is the number of channels. Each subject Si

has Ni EEG segment represented as 

si,t ∈ RC×T ,

where i indexes the subject, t indexes the segment from that subject, and T is the number of time points in each segment. Given a set of labeled training subjects, 

Dtrain = {(Si, y i)}Di=1 , yi ∈ 0, . . . , L − 1, (1) The learning objective is to train a classification model from 

Dtrain and classify previously unseen test subjects with the highest performance measures. 

A. Graph Representation of EEG Signals 

EEG recordings may vary in duration across subjects and are often characterized by non-stationary temporal patterns. We divide each recording into fixed-length overlapping seg-ments using a sliding-window strategy. This segment-based representation provides consistent input dimensions, makes long EEG recordings more computationally manageable, and supports the subsequent feature extraction step. As shown in the upper-left part of Fig. 1, each EEG recording is first segmented, and each segment is then used for feature extraction and graph construction in the proposed framework. For each segment si,t , we extract channel-level node features and form a node attribute matrix 

Xi,t ∈ RC×F ,

where F is the number of node features. Each row of Xi,t 

corresponds to one EEG channel. We construct K functional-connectivity graph views for each segment. The k-th graph view is represented by an adjacency matrix 

A(k) 

> i,t

∈ RC×C ,

The set of graph views for segment si,t is denoted as 

Ai,t = {A(1)  

> i,t

, A(2)  

> i,t

, . . . , A(K) 

> i,t

}.

Thus, each EEG segment is represented by 

Gi,t = ( Xi,t , Ai,t ) ,

where Xi,t contains channel-level node attributes and Ai,t 

contains multiple connectivity-based graph views. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Overall Framework 

Fig. 1 illustrates how the M-LINKX framework works. Each subject-level EEG recording is divided into fixed-length overlapping segments. Since diagnostic labels are available only at the subject level, each segment inherits the label of its corresponding subject during training. Our goal is to learn an encoder that maps each segment-level graph input Gi,t to a segment embedding hi,t . A classifier then maps hi,t to a class-probability vector pi,t . For a previously unseen subject, subject-level prediction is obtained by averaging segment-level probabilities: 

¯pi = 1

NiNiX

> t=1

pi,t , (2) and the predicted label is ˆyi = argmax ¯ pi, where argmax(¯ pi)

returns the class index with the highest averaged probability. Throughout the following sections, we describe the model for a generic EEG segment and omit the subject and segment indices (i, t ) when there is no ambiguity. Thus, X denotes the node feature matrix of a segment, A(k) denotes its k-th graph-view adjacency matrix, and A = {A(1) , . . . , A(K)} denotes its graph-view bank. For each segment, channel-wise node features and functional-connectivity-based graph views are extracted as model inputs. The M-LINKX encoder integrates node-feature and graph-view representations to produce a segment embed-ding, which is used for segment-level classification. During inference, subject-level prediction is obtained by soft voting the predicted probabilities across all segments. 

B. Node Feature Extraction 

For each EEG segment, channel-wise features are extracted to describe the local signal characteristics of individual elec-trodes. These features are concatenated within each EEG channel to form the node feature matrix 

X = [ x1, x2, . . . , xC ]⊤ ∈ RC×F , (3) where xj ∈ RF denotes the feature vector of the j-th EEG channel. Each row of X corresponds to one EEG channel, and each column corresponds to one selected node feature. 

C. Functional Connectivity Extraction 

Given a preprocessed EEG segment, functional connectivity (FC) is computed between pairs of EEG channels. For a connectivity metric m and frequency band b, this produces a dense FC matrix W(m,b ) ∈ RC×C , where w(m,b ) 

> pq

denotes the connectivity strength between channels cp and cq .In this work, we use coherence and the weighted phase lag index (wPLI) as connectivity metrics to construct band-specific FC matrices. 

Magnitude-Squared Coherence (Coh ). Coherence is a frequency-domain measure of linear coupling between two EEG signals. It measures how strongly two channels share consistent oscillatory activity at frequency f [28]. For channels 

cp and cq , coherence is computed from the cross-spectral density Gpq (f ) and the auto-spectral densities Gpp (f ) and 

Gqq (f ) at frequency f [29]: 

Cpq (f ) = |Gpq (f )|2

Gpp (f )Gqq (f ) . (4) The band-level coherence value is then calculated as the mean coherence over frequencies within band b:

w(Coh ,b ) 

> pq

= 1

|F b|

X 

> f∈F b

Cpq (f ). (5) Coherence value lies in [0 , 1] , where 0 indicates no linear coupling and 1 indicates perfect linear coupling. 

Weighted Phase Lag Index ( wPLI ). wPLI is a phase-based connectivity metric that measures whether two EEG channels have a consistent non-zero phase-lag relationship[30]. For each frequency band b, the signal from channel cp is first band-pass filtered, yielding r(b) 

> p

[ℓ], where ℓ = 1 , . . . , T 

indexes time samples. The analytic signal is then obtained using the Hilbert transform: 

z(b) 

> p

[ℓ] = r(b) 

> p

[ℓ] + jH

n

r(b) 

> p

[ℓ]

o

,

where H{·} denotes the Hilbert transform and j is the imag-inary unit [31]. The instantaneous phase is extracted as 

ϕ(b) 

> p

[ℓ] = arg 



z(b) 

> p

[ℓ]



.

For channels cp and cq , the phase difference is defined as 

∆ϕ(b) 

> pq

[ℓ] = ϕ(b) 

> p

[ℓ] − ϕ(b) 

> q

[ℓ]. In our implementation, wPLI is estimated from the sine of the phase difference: 

w(wPLI ,b ) 

> pq

=

PTℓ=1 sin 



∆ϕ(b) 

> pq

[ℓ]

PTℓ=1 sin 



∆ϕ(b) 

> pq

[ℓ]

 . (6) wPLI value ranges from 0 to 1, with larger values indicating stronger and more consistent non-zero phase-lag coupling. The resulting connectivity matrices are symmetric, with diagonal entries set to zero to exclude self-connections. Each selected metric-band pair is treated as one connectivity view and converted into a graph topology for multi-view learning. 

D. Graph Construction 

For each EEG segment, we construct a graph representation with each channel being a node and the FC values defining weighted edges between those nodes. Given the dense FC matrix W(m,b ) defined above, each graph view is specified by a connectivity metric m, frequency band b, and topology filter τ . The topology filter then deter-mines which edges are retained. Given a topology mask M(m,b,τ ) ∈ { 0, 1}C×C , the final adjacency matrix is obtained as 

A(k) = A(m,b,τ ) = W(m,b ) ⊙ M(m,b,τ ), (7) where ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication. We consider several topology filters, including complete ,

domain , top-k, and hybrid . Complete topology keeps all pair-wise channel connections, which forms a complete graph with edge weight denoting FC values between electrodes. Domain topology keeps a predefined sparse graph based on spatially neighboring electrodes in the standard 10–20 EEG montage. Fig. 1: Overview of the proposed M-LINKX framework. For readability, block ① should be read from top to bottom, whereas blocks ② and ③ should be read from left to right. Block ① shows the subject-level classification pipeline: each EEG recording is divided into fixed-length overlapping segments, segment-level probabilities are predicted, and subject-level prediction is obtained by averaging probabilities across segments. Block ② shows feature extraction and graph construction for a segment, where “segment 2” is represented by channel-level node features and multiple FC graph views from different connectivity metrics, frequency bands, and topology filters. Block ③ shows the M-LINKX encoder, which learns node-feature and graph-view embeddings, fuses graph-view embeddings using global trainable view weights, and produces segment-level predictions. 

Top-k topology keeps the strongest connectivity edges for each node. Hybrid topology combines the domain topology with top-k edges. Thus, complete and domain have fixed edge sets across segments, whereas top-k and hybrid can vary in both retained edges and edge weights. Fig. 2 illustrates these topology filters using alpha-band coherence, i.e. , m = coh and b = α, across consecutive EEG segments from the same recording. The figure shows that segment-level FC patterns can change across adjacent segments, with some segments showing noticeable topology changes and others preserving similar dominant connections. 

E. M-LINKX Algorithm 

Algorithm 1 outlines the major steps of the proposed 

M-LINKX . Given a training set with D subjects and K

graph-view definitions, the G ENERATE MULTI VIEW GRAPHS 

function follows the graph construction process and converts each EEG segment into a graph, with the subject label being propagated to all segments of the subject for learning. For each test subject, M-LINKX predicts probabilities of all segments of a test subject. The probabilities are averaged to obtain the subject-level prediction ˆytest .For each segment, M-LINKX follows a LINKX-style design to encode node features and graph-view adjacency matrices separately. The graph-view embeddings are combined using trainable view weights, then concatenated with the node-feature embedding and passed through an MLP for classi-fication. Unlike the original LINKX, we omit additive skip connections between adjacency and node-feature embeddings. IV. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 

A. Datasets 

We evaluate the proposed approach on two EEG datasets for dementia-related classification. AHEAP ( ds004504 ) con-tains resting-state EEG recordings from 88 subjects across Alzheimer’s disease (AD), frontotemporal dementia (FTD), 

Fig. 2: Topology-specific graph representations of alpha-band coherence from three consecutive EEG segments of the same subject recording. Nodes denote EEG channels arranged by approximate 10–20 scalp locations, and weighted edges denote retained coherence connections. Rows show the four topology filters: complete , domain , top-k, and hybrid ; columns show consecutive EEG segments. Edge thickness and color indicate coherence weight, with thicker and darker blue edges rep-resenting larger weights and thinner gray edges representing smaller weights. Algorithm 1: M-LINKX Algorithm                                                                                                

> Input: Dtrain ={(Si, y i)}Di=1 ;Stest ;
> graph-view definitions V={(mk, b k, τ k)}Kk=1 .
> Parameter: epochs ;Θ; trainable view logits ψ∈RK
> Output: ˆytest
> 1Dseg train ← ∅
> 2foreach (Si, y i)∈ D train do
> 3{G i,t }Ni
> t=1 ←GenerateMultiViewGraphs (Si,V)
> 4Dseg train ← D seg train ∪ { (Gi,t , y i)}Ni
> t=1
> 5end
> 6for e= 1 to epochs do
> 7foreach (Gi,t , y i)∈ D seg train do
> 8ZXi,t ←fnode (Xi,t )
> 9Z(k)
> i,t ←fadj (A(k)
> i,t ),k= 1 , . . . , K
> 10 λ←softmax( ψ)
> 11 ZEi,t ←PKk=1 λkZ(k)
> i,t
> 12 hi,t ←ffuse (ZXi,t ∥ZEi,t )
> 13 oi,t ←fcls (hi,t )
> 14 L ← CE( oi,t , y i)
> 15 Θ,ψ←Update(Θ ,ψ;L)
> 16 end
> 17 end
> 18 {G test ,t }Ntest
> t=1 ←GenerateMultiViewGraphs (Stest ,V)
> 19 λ←softmax( ψ)
> 20 ptest ,t ←M-LINKX( Gtest ,t ; Θ ,λ),t= 1 , . . . , N test
> 21 ˆytest ←argmax
> 1
> Ntest
> PNtest
> t=1 ptest ,t
> 
> 22 return ˆytest

TABLE I: Summary of the EEG datasets used in this study.                 

> Property AHEAP CAUEEG
> # of Subjects 36 AD, 23 FTD, 29 HC 291 Dementia, 395 MCI, 436 HC # of Channels 19 19 Condition Eyes closed Eyes closed and eyes open Sampling Rate 500 Hz 200 Hz Avg. Duration 13.21 ±2.32 min 12.80 ±2.65 min

and healthy control (HC) groups [32]. CAUEEG contains EEG recordings from 1122 subjects across dementia, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and healthy control (HC) classes [33]. For CAUEEG, we use the non-overlap version, where validation and test subjects do not overlap with the training set. Dataset characteristics are summarized in Table I. We use the EEG recordings provided by the original dataset sources without additional manual cleaning, artifact rejection, or channel interpolation. For AHEAP, we use the released preprocessed signals, which were band-pass filtered between 0.5 and 45 Hz and cleaned using independent component analysis (ICA). For CAUEEG, we use the released EEG recordings as provided and remove the two non-EEG auxiliary channels corresponding to EKG and photic stimulation. For both datasets, we retain the common 19 EEG channels: Fp1, Fp2, F7, F3, Fz, F4, F8, T3, C3, Cz, C4, T4, T5, P3, Pz, P4, T6, O1, and O2. EEG recordings are divided into overlap-ping segments using a sliding window with 50% overlap. The resulting segments are used to extract node features, construct functional-connectivity matrices, and form graph instances for model training. The majority of experiments reported in the paper are based on a 4 s segment for AHEAP and a 10 s

segment for CAUEEG (because the former has 2.5 times higher sampling frequency). In addition, we also report results 

w.r.t. different segment lengths for analysis. 

B. Experimental Setup 

To evaluate the generalization of the proposed model, we use subject-wise 5-fold cross-validation for the AHEAP dataset. For CAUEEG, we follow the official non-overlap train/validation/test split from the original study, where sub-jects in the validation and test sets do not overlap with the training set. All models are evaluated using the same subject-wise splits and three random seeds, and the final results are reported at the subject level. Models are trained using the Adam optimizer with early stopping based on validation loss. 

C. Node-feature and Graph-view Settings 

Node-feature settings: In this experiments, we use two groups of node features: relative band power (RBP), and statistical descriptors. The RBP features are computed from the power spectral density of each EEG channel using Welch’s method [34]. We extract five frequency-band features: delta δ

(1–4 Hz), theta θ (4–8 Hz), alpha α (8–13 Hz), beta β (13 –

30 Hz), and gamma γ (30 –45 Hz). The statistical descriptors summarize the amplitude distribution of each channel and in-clude mean, standard deviation, skewness, kurtosis, minimum, maximum, and peak-to-peak amplitude. 

Graph-view settings: The graph-view set V can be de-fined using different combinations of connectivity metrics, frequency bands, and topology filters. In this experiments, we use four graph views: 

V = {v1 : (wPLI , θ, complete) , v 2 : (wPLI , α, domain) ,v3 : (coh , α, hybrid) , v 4 : (coh , θ, top -k)}

These views were selected to provide a compact representation across different connectivity metrics, frequency bands, and topology filters. Coherence and wPLI are commonly used EEG functional-connectivity measures, and theta- and alpha-band connectivity have been frequently reported as informative for dementia-related EEG analysis [11, 12, 13, 14]. The selected views are therefore used as candidate views for evaluating the proposed multi-view learning framework, rather than as the only possible graph-view configuration. 

D. Baseline and Comparison Models 

We compare the proposed framework with several raw-signal, feature-based, FC-based, and graph-based baselines. 

Classical machine learning and deep learning baselines: Raw-signal baselines include a CEEDNet-style 1D-ResNet [33] and a CNN-LSTM. Feature-based baseline include MLP trained on flattened channel-level node features, allowing us to assess performance without functional-connectivity information. We also include an ensemble baseline that combines CNN-LSTM with node-feature MLP to evaluate whether temporal EEG patterns and channel-level descriptors provide complementary information. 

Graph learning baselines: We evaluate single-view GATv2 [35] and LINKX-style models [26] using one FC view at a time from the four-view candidate set V. For each baseline, the model is trained separately on each candidate view, and the best subject-level performance among the four runs is reported. This ensures that the single-view baselines are compared using their strongest candidate view. For the LINKX baseline, we use the same no-skip LINKX-style encoder as in M-LINKX ,so the comparison between LINKX and M-LINKX focuses on the effect of multi-view connectivity fusion. 

Multi-view learning baselines: We train two multi-view learn-ing baselines. CNN is trained by stacking multiple view FC matrices as an image-like representation, and employs convolutional filters to learn features across multiple views for segment classification. This is motivated by previous studies using EEG functional-connectivity or connectome represen-tations with convolutional models [11] using multi-view FC matrices. The multi-view GATv2 [35] model represents each EEG segment as multiple graphs with shared node features and different connectivity views. Each view is processed by a shared GATv2 encoder, and the resulting embeddings are fused for classification. These baselines allow us to compare 

M-LINKX against alternative ways of integrating the same multi-view connectivity information. 

E. Performance Metrics 

All reported results are evaluated at the subject level because diagnostic labels are defined for subjects rather than individual EEG segments. To account for imbalanced class distributions across diagnostic groups, we report balanced accuracy, which measures average recall across classes, and macro-F1, which averages class-wise F1-scores combining precision and recall. 

F. Results and Analysis 1) Balanced Accuracy and Macro-F1 Scores: Table II re-ports the subject-level classification performance on CAUEEG and AHEAP. As shown in the table, M-LINKX achieves the best balanced accuracy and macro-F1 on both datasets. For CAUEEG, M-LINKX obtains balanced accuracy of 

66 .49% and macro-F1 of 66 .65% , outperforming the strongest non-proposed baseline by about 5.0% in balanced accuracy and 4.4% in macro-F1. In AHEAP, M-LINKX also obtains the highest balanced accuracy and macro-F1, although the im-provement over the strongest graph-based baselines is smaller. This suggests that the proposed multi-view LINKX-style de-sign is effective across both datasets, but the magnitude of improvement is dataset-dependent. Several patterns can be observed from Table II. First, under the main experimental settings, M-LINKX improves over the node-feature-only MLP, suggesting that functional connectivity can provide complementary information beyond channel-level features when integrated effectively. Second, 

M-LINKX outperforms single-view LINKX and single-view GATv2, indicating that one connectivity view may not fully capture heterogeneous FC patterns across metrics, frequency bands, and topology filters. Third, M-LINKX also improves over multi-view GATv2, suggesting that LINKX-style separate encoding of node features and adjacency-based connectivity 

Fig. 3: Subject-level confusion matrices of M-LINKX on CAUEEG (10 s) and AHEAP (4 s). Cells show average subject counts and row-normalized percentages over three random seeds. For AHEAP, confusion matrices are first summed across folds within each seed. information is effective for the proposed multi-view FC rep-resentation. 

2) Subject Classification Confusion Matrices: Fig. 3 reports the normalized subject-level confusion matrices of M-LINKX .On CAUEEG, most errors involve the MCI class. In particular, a noticeable portion of MCI subjects is predicted as HC, and some dementia subjects are predicted as MCI. This suggests that MCI remains difficult to distinguish because it may share EEG characteristics with both healthy aging and dementia. Similarly, in AHEAP, the model performs well for HC and AD, but FTD shows substantially lower recall. Most FTD errors are predicted as AD, indicating that the current con-nectivity metrics, frequency bands, and topology filters may capture general dementia-related abnormalities but are less discriminative for separating dementia subtypes. This indicates that additional features or adaptive graph-view selection may be needed for more fine-grained AD–FTD discrimination. 

3) Algorithm Performance vs. Segment Lengths: Although 

M-LINKX performs best under the main settings, Fig. 4 shows that this advantage is not consistent across all segment dura-tions. Overall, M-LINKX remains competitive across different durations on both datasets, but its advantage over the baselines becomes less consistent as the window length increases. This suggests that increasing the segment length may stabilize some feature-based baselines, but does not necessarily improve multi-view connectivity learning. On CAUEEG, M-LINKX achieves its best performance with the 10-second window. As the duration increases, its per-formance decreases, while several baselines remain relatively stable. This may indicate that longer windows provide more stable channel-level feature estimates, but may also smooth or average out transient connectivity patterns that are useful for the proposed multi-view graph representation. For AHEAP, some baseline models improve as the segment duration increases, whereas M-LINKX shows a decreasing trend. One possible explanation is that longer windows stabi-lize node-feature or single-view representations, while multi-view FC graphs may become less distinctive when dynamic connectivity patterns are averaged over a longer interval. TABLE II: Subject-level performance of M-LINKX and the baseline models, reported as mean ± standard deviation over three random seeds. Best and second-best results are shown in bold and underlined italics , respectively. For methods involving different Functional connectivity (“FC Input”), V denotes all four candidate graph views and v⋆ denotes the best-performing view among the four candidate graph views V.                                                                                                                                    

> CAUEEG (10-second window) AHEAP (4-second window)
> 35 HC, 33 MCI, 22 Dementia 29 HC, 23 FTD, 36 AD
> Model RawEEG Node features FC input Balanced Acc. Macro-F1 Balanced Acc. Macro-F1
> 1D ResNet ✓0.6146 ±0.0135 0.6224 ±0.0141 0.5221 ±0.0432 0.4815 ±0.0511 CNN-LSTM ✓0.5700 ±0.0133 0.5585 ±0.0049 0.5697 ±0.0527 0.5494 ±0.0438 MLP-node ✓0.5949 ±0.0233 0.5961 ±0.0199 0.5740 ±0.0477 0.5550 ±0.0446 Ensemble ✓✓0.6084 ±0.0285 0.6048 ±0.0303 0.5791 ±0.0258 0.5528 ±0.0273 CNN V0.5210 ±0.0243 0.5100 ±0.0241 0.4758 ±0.0312 0.4596 ±0.0429 LINKX ✓v⋆0.6077 ±0.0198 0.6154 ±0.0179 0.6060 ±0.0460 0.5806 ±0.0384 GATv2 ✓v⋆0.5910 ±0.0236 0.5868 ±0.0190 0.5383 ±0.0255 0.4901 ±0.0393 Multi-view GATv2 ✓V0.5916 ±0.0320 0.5992 ±0.0316 0.6041 ±0.0303 0.5895 ±0.0187
> M-LINKX (proposed) ✓V0.6649 ±0.0294 0.6665 ±0.0389 0.6191 ±0.0281 0.5990 ±0.0257

G. Learned Graph-view Weights 

Fig. 5 shows the learned graph-view weights of M-LINKX 

across segment durations. The weights are not uniform, indi-cating that different connectivity views contribute differently to the final prediction. This supports multi-view connectivity modeling, as different metric-band-topology views may con-tribute differently across datasets and segment lengths. On CAUEEG, the weight distribution changes noticeably across durations. For the 10-second setting, M-LINKX per-forms best and the coherence-alpha hybrid view receives the largest weight. When the duration increases to 20 seconds, this dominant weight drops and the view weights become more balanced. This may partly explain the performance decrease at longer durations. Prior work on dynamic functional connectivity has shown that window length strongly affects connectivity estimates and that wider windows can reduce temporal resolution [36]. Therefore, longer EEG segments may average over transient connectivity patterns and make graph views less distinctive. The learned weights for AHEAP are more evenly dis-tributed. The highest-weighted view also changes across du-rations: wPLI-alpha domain is largest at 2 seconds, while coherence-theta top-k is largest at 4 and 6 seconds. This suggests that the most useful connectivity view can change with segment duration. These results also motivate future adaptive view selection instead of using one global view-weight vector for all subjects and disease groups. 

H. Discussion 

The results suggest that multi-view functional-connectivity learning can improve EEG segment-based dementia classifi-cation when the connectivity information is modeled appro-priately. Meanwhile, the learned view weights are relatively stable across segment lengths and are not uniform, indicating that M-LINKX uses the graph views unequally during fusion. These weights reflect the behavior of the model and should not be interpreted as direct biological importance. The duration analysis further shows that the contribution of connectivity-based models varies across segment lengths. Since functional-connectivity estimates and retained graph 

Fig. 4: Subject-level balanced accuracy comparisons between 

M-LINKX and baseline models w.r.t. different segment dura-tions on CAUEEG and AHEAP. y-axis denotes mean balanced accuracies over three random seeds, and error bars denote standard deviation. 

Fig. 5: M-LINKX trainable graph-view weights across segment durations. Bars denote the mean weight over three random seeds, and error bars denote standard deviation. topologies can change with the EEG window duration, the optimal segment length may depend on the dataset, disease groups, and model architecture. The confusion matrices also show that some diagnostic groups remain difficult to separate, especially clinically related classes such as HC/MCI and AD/FTD. V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this paper, we proposed M-LINKX , a multi-view graph learning framework for EEG-based dementia classification. We argue that EEG data are noisy and the correlation between channels ( i.e. , electrodes) may provide useful information to benefit subject classification. Instead of finding a single best functional connectivity view, M-LINKX represents each EEG segment using channel-level node features and multiple functional-connectivity graph views constructed from different connectivity metrics, frequency bands, and topology filters. By leveraging the multi-view graph topologies and a simple het-erophilic graph learning backbone, which treated node features and adjacency matrices as two separated information sources, 

M-LINKX adaptively learns and aggregates features from different views, and further concatenates node features for segment level prediction. Experiments on two dementia-related EEG datasets show that multi-view functional connectivity can improve EEG-based classification when it is integrated with appropriate graph-learning architectures. Our analysis also suggests that segment lengths and edge construction strategies play important roles for graph based methods. Future work will explore adaptive graph-view selection, where the model can assign different importance to connec-tivity views across datasets, subjects, or disease groups. DATA AVAILABILITY 

The datasets used in our study are publicly accessible from the following sources:  

> •

AHEAP: OpenNeuro ds004504, v1.0.8.  

> •

CAUEEG: Available from the authors upon request [33]. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work has been supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant Nos. IIS-2236579, IIS-2302786, and IOS-2430224. REFERENCES [1] Alzheimer’s Disease International, “Dementia statistics,” https://www.al zint.org/about/dementia-facts-figures/dementia-statistics/, 2025. [2] N. Salari et al. , “The global prevalence of mild cognitive impairment in geriatric population with emphasis on influential factors: a systematic review and meta-analysis,” BMC Geriatrics , vol. 25, no. 1, p. 313, 2025. [3] D. Urso et al. , “Incidence and Prevalence of Frontotemporal Dementia: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” JAMA Neur. , vol. 82, no. 11, p. 1144, Nov. 2025. [4] J. Bi et al. , “The EEG analysis and identification of Alzheimer’s disease: a review,” Frontiers Aging Neurosci. , vol. 17, p. 1686628, Dec. 2025. [5] J. Xie et al. , “A Transformer-Based Approach Combining Deep Learn-ing Network and Spatial-Temporal Information for Raw EEG Classifi-cation,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. and Rehabil. Eng. , vol. 30, pp. 2126– 2136, 2022. [6] J. Sreedhar et al. , “Fuzzy RNN Model-Based Classification of Alzheimer’s Disease and Dementia Using Brain EEG Signals,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. , vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 5559–5568, May 2025. [7] T. Vo et al. , “Extraction and interpretation of EEG features for diagnosis and severity prediction of Alzheimer’s Disease and Frontotemporal dementia using deep learning,” Biomed. Signal Process. and Control ,vol. 112, p. 108667, Feb. 2026. [8] D. Puri et al. , “Alzheimer’s Disease Detection using Empirical Mode Decomposition and Hjorth parameters of EEG signal,” in 2022 Int. Conf. Decis. Aid Sci. and Appl. (DASA) . IEEE, Mar. 2022, pp. 23–28. [9] A. Miltiadous et al. , “DICE-Net: A Novel Convolution-Transformer Architecture for Alzheimer Detection in EEG Signals,” IEEE Access ,vol. 11, pp. 71 840–71 858, 2023. [10] A. T. Phan and X. Zhu, “EDLAD: Ensemble Deep Learning for Alzheimer’s Disease Detection using Brain EEG Signals,” in 2025 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. and Appl. (ICMLA) . IEEE, Dec. 2025, pp. 555–562. [11] R. Jiang et al. , “Classification for Alzheimer’s disease and frontotempo-ral dementia via resting-state electroencephalography-based coherence and convolutional neural network,” Cogn. Neurodyn. , vol. 19, no. 1, p. 46, Dec. 2025. [12] H. Zheng et al. , “Time-Frequency functional connectivity alterations in Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia: An EEG analysis using machine learning,” Clin. Neurophysi , vol. 170, pp. 110–119, Feb. 2025. [13] E. R. Paitel et al. , “Functional and effective EEG connectivity patterns in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment: a systematic review,” Frontiers Aging Neurosci. , vol. 17, p. 1496235, Feb. 2025. [14] T. Mlinariˇ c et al. , “EEG-based classification of alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia using functional connectivity,” Scientific Rep. ,vol. 16, no. 1, p. 4903, Jan. 2026. [15] S. Wu et al. , “Changes of brain functional network in Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia: a graph-theoretic analysis,” BMC Neurosci. , vol. 25, no. 1, p. 30, Jul. 2024. [16] A. T. Adebisi, H.-W. Lee, and K. C. Veluvolu, “EEG-Based Brain Functional Network Analysis for Differential Identification of Dementia-Related Disorders and Their Onset,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. and Rehabil. Eng. , vol. 32, pp. 1198–1209, 2024. [17] S. Abadal et al. , “Graph neural networks for electroencephalogram analysis: Alzheimer’s disease and epilepsy use cases,” Neural Netw. ,vol. 181, p. 106792, Jan. 2025. [18] J. Cao, B. Li, and X. Li, “Identification of Alzheimer’s disease brain networks based on EEG phase synchronization,” Biomed. Eng. OnLine ,vol. 24, no. 1, p. 32, Mar. 2025. [19] X. Wang et al. , “Am-gcn: Adaptive multi-channel graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Conf. , 2020, pp. 1243–1253. [20] K. Yao et al. , “Multi-view graph convolutional networks with attention mechanism,” Artif. Intell. , vol. 307, p. 103708, 2022. [21] S. Xiao et al. , “Graph neural networks for multi-view learning: A taxonomic review,” Artif. Intell. Rev. , vol. 57, no. 12, p. 341, 2024. [22] G. Peng, F. Dornaika, and J. Charafeddine, “Multi-view learning with graph convolution networks adopting diverse graphs and genuine deep feature fusion,” Artif. Intell. Rev. , vol. 58, no. 9, p. 290, 2025. [23] Y. Liu et al. , “Multi-frequency EEG and multi-functional connectivity graph convolutional network based detection method of patients with Alzheimer’s disease,” Complex & Intell. Syst. , vol. 11, no. 8, 2025. [24] Q. Xu et al. , “A multi-graph convolutional network method for Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis based on multi-frequency EEG data with dual-mode connectivity,” Frontiers Neurosci. , vol. 19, Jul. 2025. [25] D. Zhang and C. Zhu, “A dual path graph neural network framework for dementia diagnosis,” Scientific Reports , vol. 15, no. 1, Jul. 2025. [26] D. Lim et al. , “Large scale learning on non-homophilous graphs: New benchmarks and strong simple methods,” Adv. neural Inf. Process. Syst. ,vol. 34, pp. 20 887–20 902, 2021. [27] L. Yang et al. , “Do we really need message passing in brain network modeling?” in 42nd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 2025. [28] P. L. Nunez and R. Srinivasan, Electric fields of the brain: the neuro-physics of EEG . Oxford university press, 2006. [29] J. S. Bendat and A. G. Piersol, Random data: analysis and measurement procedures . John Wiley & Sons, 2011. [30] M. Vinck et al. , “An improved index of phase-synchronization for electrophysiological data in the presence of volume-conduction, noise and sample-size bias,” NeuroImage , vol. 55(4), pp. 1548–1565, 2011. [31] D. Gabor, “Theory of communication,” J. Inst. Elect. Eng. - Part I: General , vol. 94, no. 73, pp. 58–58, Jan. 1947. [32] A. Ntetska et al. , “A complementary dataset of scalp eeg recordings featuring participants with alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal dementia, and healthy controls, obtained from photostimulation eeg,” Data , vol. 10, no. 5, p. 64, 2025. [33] M.-j. Kim, Y. C. Youn, and J. Paik, “Deep learning-based EEG analysis to classify normal, mild cognitive impairment, and dementia: Algorithms and dataset,” NeuroImage , vol. 272, p. 120054, 2023. [34] P. Welch, “The use of fast fourier transform for the estimation of power spectra: A method based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms,” IEEE Trans. audio and electroacoust. , vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 70–73, 1967. [35] S. Brody, U. Alon, and E. Yahav, “How attentive are graph attention networks?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14491 , 2021. [36] S. Shakil, C.-H. Lee, and S. D. Keilholz, “Evaluation of sliding window correlation performance for characterizing dynamic functional connec-tivity and brain states,” Neuroimage , vol. 133, pp. 111–128, 2016.